README.md, before:

# gcfgenv

[![Go Reference](https://pkg.go.dev/badge/github.com/rstudio/gcfgenv.svg)](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/rstudio/gcfgenv)

**This repository is a proof-of-concept meant to serve internal needs only.**

`gcfgenv` is a Go package for configuring applications with environment
variables in addition to their existing configuration files.

The precise goal is to provide environment variable overrides for [`gcfg`
configurations](https://gopkg.in/gcfg.v1) without the need to specify anything
manually whatsoever. There is a strong "convention over configuration" ethos.

`gcfgenv` is **not** a general-purpose way to read environment variables into a
struct -- the package only supports to structures and conventions permitted by
`gcfg`, which are comparatively limited.

## Usage

There are only two exported functions:

* `ReadWithEnvInto()`, which wraps `gcfg.ReadInto()`; and
* `ReadFileWithEnvInto()`, which wraps `gcfg.ReadFileInto()`

Configuration fields are converted to environment variables using the follow
rules:

* Section and field names (including those using [the `gcfg` struct
  tag](https://pkg.go.dev/gopkg.in/gcfg.v1#hdr-Data_structure)) are converted to
  uppercase.
* Slice fields use `,` as a separator.
* Dashes are converted to underscores.
* Subsection names are left as-is.

For example, the following environment variables (and global prefix `APPNAME_`):

``` shell
APPNAME_SEC_FIELD=geese
APPNAME_SEC_k1_FIELD=cats
APPNAME_SEC_k1_OTHER_FIELD=zebras,elephants
```

are equivalent to the following configuration file:

``` ini
[sec]
field = geese

[sec "k1"]
field = cats
other-field = zebras
other-field = elephants
```

## Limitations

* Slice fields that may legitimately contain `,` in their entries cannot be
  parsed correctly.

* No support for setting `gcfg`'s "default values" subsection. It is not
  possible to determine after the initial configuration file pass whether a
  value was defaulted, so resetting a field's default via environment variable
  could lead to surprising results.

## Versioning

`gcfgenv` follows semantic versioning.

## License

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0. See `LICENSE` for details.

Commit message:

add tests for a rich section / environment variable
Also add variants for underscores, pipes, multiple spaces, and
underscored-variants of whitespace environment variables. We considered adding
the ability to parse underscored environment variable keys in such a way that
they could "fill in" for not found whitespace keys. However, this created
ambiguity because (1) we have to remove the keys after they are used, lest the
key be used again to create a missing section that we do not want, (2) it is
possible to use both whitespace and underscored variants in section headings so
both, one, or neither could be present, and (3) map ordering is
non-deterministic.

As a result of this, the complexity to implement, and the complexity to correct
this ambiguity, we opted to not implement this functionality for now but leave
tests in place that clarify the nature of our behavior. Right now, no products
using `gcfgenv` have a requirement for whitespace in subsection titles, so we
added a note to advise avoiding such madness. 😄

README.md, after:

# gcfgenv

[![Go Reference](https://pkg.go.dev/badge/github.com/rstudio/gcfgenv.svg)](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/rstudio/gcfgenv)

**This repository is a proof-of-concept meant to serve internal needs only.**

`gcfgenv` is a Go package for configuring applications with environment
variables in addition to their existing configuration files.

The precise goal is to provide environment variable overrides for [`gcfg`
configurations](https://gopkg.in/gcfg.v1) without the need to specify anything
manually whatsoever. There is a strong "convention over configuration" ethos.

`gcfgenv` is **not** a general-purpose way to read environment variables into a
struct -- the package only supports to structures and conventions permitted by
`gcfg`, which are comparatively limited.

## Usage

There are only two exported functions:

* `ReadWithEnvInto()`, which wraps `gcfg.ReadInto()`; and
* `ReadFileWithEnvInto()`, which wraps `gcfg.ReadFileInto()`

Configuration fields are converted to environment variables using the follow
rules:

* Section and field names (including those using [the `gcfg` struct
  tag](https://pkg.go.dev/gopkg.in/gcfg.v1#hdr-Data_structure)) are converted to
  uppercase.
* Slice fields use `,` as a separator.
* Dashes are converted to underscores.
* Subsection names are left as-is.

For example, the following environment variables (and global prefix `APPNAME_`):

``` shell
APPNAME_SEC_FIELD=geese
APPNAME_SEC_k1_FIELD=cats
APPNAME_SEC_k1_OTHER_FIELD=zebras,elephants
```

are equivalent to the following configuration file:

``` ini
[sec]
field = geese

[sec "k1"]
field = cats
other-field = zebras
other-field = elephants
```

## Limitations

* Slice fields that may legitimately contain `,` in their entries cannot be
  parsed correctly.

* No support for setting `gcfg`'s "default values" subsection. It is not
  possible to determine after the initial configuration file pass whether a
  value was defaulted, so resetting a field's default via environment variable
  could lead to surprising results.

* Subsections with whitespace in the subsection heading (i.e. `[Section "Sub Section"]`) require
  environment variable keys that have whitespace. This does not work in most shells or environments.
  We recommend using `snake_case` or `kebab-case` in lieu of whitespace delimited subsection headings.
  A whitespace substitute (i.e. `_` or `-`) is not implemented in environment variable parsing because it leads to
  non-deterministic behavior or unwieldy complexity. Choose your subsection headers wisely.

## Versioning

`gcfgenv` follows semantic versioning.

## License

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0. See `LICENSE` for details.
